The Morning of The Monkey


Judge Dee was enjoying the cool summer morning in the open gallery built along
the rear of his official residence. He had just finished breakfast inside with
his family, and now was having his tea there all alone, as had become his fixed
habit during the year he had been serving as magistrate of the lake district
Han-yuan. He had drawn his rattan armchair close to the carved marble
balustrade. Slowly stroking his long black beard, he gazed up contentedly at the
tall trees and dense undergrowth covering the mountain slope that rose directly
in front of the gallery like a protecting wall of cool verdure. From it came the
busy twitter of small birds, and the murmur of the cascade farther along.  It
was a pity, he thought, that these relaxed moments of peaceful enjoyment were so
brief. Presently he would have to go to the chancery in the front section of the
tribunal compound, and have a look at the official correspondence that had come
in.


Suddenly there was the sound of rustling leaves and breaking twigs. Two furry
black shapes came rushing through the tree-tops. swinging from branch to branch
by their long, thin arms, and leaving a rain of falling leaves in their
wake. The judge looked after the gibbons with a smile. He never tired of
admiring their lithe grace as they came speeding past. Shy as they were, the
gibbons living on the mountain slope had become accustomed to that solitary
figure sitting there every morning. Sometimes one of them would stop for one
brief moment and deftly catch the banana Judge Dee threw at him..


Again the leaves rustled. Now another gibbon came into sight. He moved slowly,
using only one long arm and his hand-like feet. He was carrying a small object
in his left hand. The gibbon halted in front of the gallery and, perched on a
lower branch, darted an inquisitive look at the judge from his round, brown
eyes.  Now Judge Dee saw what the animal had in his left hand: it was a golden
ring with a large, sparkling green stone.  He knew that gibbons often snatch
small objects that catch their fancy, but also that their interest is
short-lived, especially if they find they can't eat what they have picked up.
If he wouldn't make the gibbon drop the ring then and there, he would throw it
away somewhere in the forest, and the owner would never recover it.


Since the judge had no fruit at hand to distract the gibbon's attention from the
ring, he quickly took his tinderbox from his sleeve and began to arrange its
contents on the tea-table, carefully examining and sniffing at each object. He
saw out of the corner of his eye that the gibbon was watching him. Soon he let
the ring drop, swung himself down to the lowest branch and remained hanging
there by his long, spidery arms, following Judge Dee's every gesture with eager
interest. The judge noticed that a few blades of straw were sticking to the
gibbon's black fur.  He couldn't hold the fickle animal's attention for long.
The gibbon called out a friendly 'Wak wak!' then swung itself up onto a higher
branch, and disappeared among the green leaves.


Judge Dee stepped over the balustrade and down onto the moss-covered boulders
that lined the foot of the mountain slope.  Soon he had spotted the glittering
ring.  He picked it up and climbed back onto the gallery.  A closer examination
proved that it was rather large, evidently a man's ring.  It consisted of two
intertwined dragons of solid gold, and the emerald was unusually big and of
excellent quality.  The owner would be glad to get this valuable antique
specimen back.  Just when he was about to put the ring away in his sleeve, his
eye fell on a few rust-brown spots on its inside.  Creasing his bushy eyebrows,
he brought the ring closer.  The stains looked uncommonly like dried blood.


He turned round and clapped his hands.  When his old house steward came
shuffling out to the gallery, he asked:


'What housed stand on the mountain slope over there, steward?'


'There are none, sir.  The slope is much too steep, and covered entirely by the
dense forest.  There are several villas on top of the ridge, though.'


'Yes, I remember having seen those summer villas.  Do you happen to know who is
living there?'


'Well, sir, the pawnbroker Leng, for instance.  And also Wang, the pharmacist.'


'Leng I don't know.  And Wang, you say?  I suppose you mean the owner of the
large pharmacy in the market-place, opposite the Temple of Confucius?  A small,
dapper fellow, always looking rather worried?'


'Yes indeed, sir.  He has good reasons to look worried, too, sir.  His business
isn't going very well this year, I heard.  And his only son is mentally
defective.  He'll be twenty next year, and still he can neither read nor write.
I don't know what is to become of a boy like that...'


Judge Dee nodded absent-mindedly.  The villas on the ridge were out, for gibbons
are too shy to venture into and inhabited area.  He could have picked it up, of
course, in a quiet corner of a large garden up there.  But even then he would
have thrown it away long before he had traversed the forest and arrived at the
foot of the slope.  The gibbon must have found the ring much farther down.


He dismissed the steward and had another look at the ring.  The glitter of the
emerald seemed to have become dull suddenly, it had become a somber eye that
fixed him with a mournful stare.  Annoyed at his discomfiture, he quickly put it
back into his sleeve.  He would issue a public notice himself at the tribunal
and that would be the end of it.  He went inside, and walked through his
residence  to his front garden, and from there on to the large central courtyard
of the tribunal compound.


It was fairly cool there, for the big buildings surrounding the yard protected
it from the morning sun.  The headman of the constables was inspecting the
equipment of a dozen of his men, lined up in the center of the courtyard.  All
sprang to attention when they saw the magistrate approaching.  Judge Dee was
about to walk past them, on to the chancery over on the other side, when a
sudden thought made him halt in his steps.  He asked the headman:


'Do you know of any inhabited place in the forest on the mountain slope, behind
my residence?'


'No, Your Honour, there are no houses, as far as I know.  Halfway up there is a
hut, though.  A small log-cabin, formerly used by a woodcutter.  It has been
standing empty for a long time now.'  Then he added importantly: 'Vagabonds
often stay there for the night, sir.  That's why I go up there regularly.  Just
to see that they make no mischief.'


This might fit.  In a deserted hut, halfway up the slope...


'What do you call regularly?' he asked sharply.


'Well, I mean to say... once every five or six weeks, sir. I...'


'I don't call that regularly!' the judge interrupted him curtly.  'I  expect you
to...'  He broke off in mid-sentence.  This wouldn't do.  A vague, uneasy
feeling oughtn't to make him lose his temper.  It must be the savoury sitting
heavily on his stomach that had spoiled his pleasant, relaxed mood.  He shouldn't
take meat with the morning rice...  He resumed, in a more friendly manner:


'How far is that hut from here, headman?'


'A quarter of an hour's walk, sir.  On the narrow footpath that leads up the
slope.'


'Right. Call Tao Gan here!'


The headman ran to the chancery.  He came back with a gaunt, elderly man, clad
in a long robe of faded brown cotton and wit ha high square cap of black gauze
on his head.  He had a long, melancholy face with a drooping moustache and a
wispy chinbeard, and three long hairs waxed from the wart on his left cheek.
When Tao Gan had wished his chief a good morning, Judge Dee took his assistant
to the corner of the yard.  He showed him the ring and told him how he had got
it.  'You notice the dried blood sticking to it.  Probably the owner cut his
hand when taking a walk in the forest.  He took the ring off before washing his
hand in the brook, and then the gibbon snatched it.  Since it is quite a
valuable piece, and since we have still an hour before the morning session
begins, we'll go up there and have a look.  Perhaps the owner is still wandering
about searching for his ring.  Were there any important letters by the morning
courier?'


Tao Gan's long, sallow face fell as he replied:


'There was a brief note from Chiang-pei, from our Sergeant Hoong, sir.  He
reports that Ma Joong and Chiao Tai haven't yet succeeded in discovering a
clue.'


Judge Dee frowned.  Sergeant Hoong and his two other lieutenants had left for
the neighbouring district of Chiang-pei two days before, in order to assist
Judge Dee's colleague there who was working on a difficult case with
ramifications in his own district.  'Well,' he said with a sigh, 'let's go.  A
brisk walk will do us good!'  He beckoned the headman and told him to accompany
them with two constables.


They left the tribunal compound by the back door, and, a little way along the
narrow mud road, the headman took a footpath that led up into the forest.


The path rose gradually in a zig-zag pattern but it was still a stiff climb.
They met nobody and the only sound they heard was the twittering of the birds,
high up in the tree-tops.  After about a quarter of an hour the headman halted
and pointed at a cluster of tall trees farther up.


'There it is, sir!' he announced.


Soon they found themselves in a small clearing surrounded by high oak trees.  In
the rear stood a small log-cabin with a mossy thatched roof.  The door was
closed, the only window shuttered.  In front stood a chopping-block made of an
old tree trunk; beside it was a heap of straw.  It was still as the grave; the
place seemed completely deserted.


Judge Dee walked through the tall, wet grass and pulled the door open.  In the
semi-dark interior he saw a deal table wit two footstools, and against the back
wall a bare plank-bed.  On the floor in front lay the still figure of a man,
clad in a jacket and trousers of faded blue cloth.  His jaw was sagging, his
glazed eyes wide open.


The judge quickly turned round and ordered the headman to open the shutters.
Then he and Tao Gan squatted down by the side of the prone figure.  It was a
elderly man, thin but rather tall.  He had a broad, regular face with a grey
moustache and a short, neatly-trimmed goatee.  The grey hair on top of the head
was a mas of clotted blood.  The right had was folded over the breast, the left
stretched out, close against the side of the body.  Judge Dee tried to lift the
arm but found it had stiffened completely.  'Must have died late last night!' he
muttered.


'What happened to his left hand, sir?' Tao Gan asked?


Four fingers had been cut off just at the last joint, leaving only blood-covered
stumps.  Only the thumb was intact.


The judge studied the sunburnt, mutilated hand carefully.


'Do you see that narrow band of white skin round the index, Tao Gan?  Its
irregular outline corresponds to that of the intertwined dragons of the emerald
ring.  My hunch was right.  This is the owner, and he was murdered.'  He got up
and told the headman, 'Let your men carry the corpse outside!'


While the two constables were dragging the dead man away, Judge Dee and Tao Gan
quickly searched the hut.  The floor, the table and the two stools were covered
by a thick layer of dust, but the plank-bed had been cleaned very thoroughly.
They did not see a single bloodstain.  Pointing at the many confused footprints
in the dust on the floor, Tao Gan remarked:


'Evidently a number of people were about here last night. This print here would
seem to be left by a small, pointed woman's shoe.  And that there by a man's
shoe, and a very big one too!'


The judge nodded.  He studied the floor a while, then said: 'I don't see any
traces of the body having been dragged across the floor, so it must have been
carried inside.  They neatly cleaned the plank-bed.  Then, instead of putting
the body there, they deposited it on the floor!  Strange affair!  Well, let's
have a second look at the corpse.'


Outside Judge Dee pointed at the heap of straw and resumed:


'Everything fits, Tao Gan.  I noticed a few blades of straw clinging to the
gibbon's fur.  When the body was being carried to the hut, the ring slipped from
the stump of the left index and fell into the straw.  When the gibbon passed by
here early this morning, his sharp eyes spotted the glittering object among the
straw, and he picked it up.  It took us a quarter of an hour to come here along
the winding path, but as the crow flied it's but a short distance from here to
the trees at the foot of the slope, behind my house.  It took the gibbon very
little time to rush down through  the tree-tops.'


Tao Gan stooped and examined the chopping-block.


'There are no traces of blood here, sir.  And the four cut-off fingers are
nowhere to be seen.'


'Evidently the man was mutilated and murdered somewhere else,' the judge said.
'His body was carried up here afterwards.'


'Then the murderer must have been a hefty fellow, sir.  It isn't an easy job to
carry a body all the way up here.  Unless the murderer had assistance, of
course.'


'Search him!'


As Tao Gan began to go through the dead man's clothes, Judge Dee carefully
examined the head.  He thought that the skull must have been bashed in from
behind, with a fairly small but heavy instrument, probably an iron hammer.  Then
he studied the intact right hand.  The palm and the inside of the fingers were
rather horny, but the nails were fairly long and well kept.


'There's absolutely nothing, sir!' Tao Gan exclaimed as he righted himself.
'Not even a handkerchief!  The murderer must have taken away everything that
could have led to the identification of his victim.'


'We do have the ring, however,' the judge observed.  'He had doubtless planned
to take that too.  When he found it missing, he must have realized that it fell
off the mutilated hand somewhere on the way here.  He probably searched for it
with a lantern, but in vain.'  He turned to the headman, who was chewing on a
toothpick with a bored look, and asked curtly: 'Ever seen this man before?'


The headman sprang to attention.


'No, Your Honour. Never!' He cast a questioning look at the two constables.
When they shook their heads, he added: 'Must be a vagabond from up-country,
sir.'


'Tell your men to make a stretcher from a couple of thick branches and take the
body t other tribunal.  Let the clerks and the rest of the court personnel file
past it, and see whether any of them knows the man. After you have warned the
coroner, go to Mr. Wang's pharmacy in the market-place, and ask him to come and
see me in my office.'


While walking downhill Tao Gan asked curiously:


'Do you think that pharmacist knows more about this, sir?'


'Oh no.  But it had just occurred to me that the dead body might as well have
been carried down as up hill! Therefore I want to ask Wang whether there was a
fight among vagabonds or other riff-raff on the ridge last night.  At the same
time I want to ask him who else is living there, beside himself and that
pawnbroker Leng.  Heaven, my robe is caught!'


As Tao Gan was prying loose the thorny branch, Judge Dee went on: 'The dead
man's dress points to a labourer or an artisan, but he has the face of an
intellectual.  And his sunburnt and calloused but well-kept hand suggests an
educated man of means, who likes to live outdoors.  I conclude that he was a man
of means from the fact that he possessed that expensive emerald ring.'


Tao Gan remained silent the rest of the way.  When they had arrived at the mud
road, however, he said slowly:


'I don't think that the expensive ring proves that the man was rich, sir.
Vagrant crooks are very superstitious as a rule.  They will often hang on to a
piece of stolen jewellery, just because they believe it brings them good luck.'


'Quite.  Well, I'll go and change now, for I am wet all over.  You'll find me
presently, in my private office.'




---




After Judge Dee had taken a bath and changed into his ceremonial robe of green
brocade, he had just time for one cup of tea.  Then Tao Gan helped him to put
the black winged judge's cap on his head, and they went together to the
court-hall, adjoining Judge Dee's private office.  Only a few routine matters
came up, so the judge could rap his gavel and close the session after only half
an hour.  Back in his private office, he seated himself behind his large writing
desk, pushed the pile of official documents aside and placed the emerald ring
before him.  Then he took his folding fan from his sleeve and said, pointing
with it at the ring:


'A queer case, Tao Gan!  What could those cut-off fingers mean?  That the
murderer tortured his victim prior to killing him, in order to make him tell
something?  Or did he cut the fingers off after the murder, because they bore
some mark or other that might prove the dead man's identity?'


Tao Gan did not reply at once.  He poured a cup of hot tea for the judge, then
sat down again on the stool in front of the desk and began, slowly pulling at
the three long hairs that sprouted from his left cheek:


'Since the four fingers seem to have been cut off together with one blow, I
think your second supposition is right, sir.  According our headman, that
deserted hut was often used by vagabonds.  Now, many of those vagrant ruffians
are organized in regular gangs or secret brotherhoods.  Every prospective member
must swear an oath of allegiance to the leader of the gang and, as proof of his
sincerity and his courage, himself solemnly cut off the tip of his left little
finger.  If this is indeed a gang murder, then the killers may well have hacked
off the four fingers in order to conceal the mutilation of the little finger,
and thus destroy an important clue to the background of the crime.'


Judge Dee tapped his fan on the desk.


'Excellent reasoning, Tao Gan.  Let's start by assuming that you are right.  In
that case...'


There was a knock on the door.  The coroner came in and respectfully greeted the
judge.  He placed a filled-out official form on the desk and said:


'This is my autopsy report, Your Honour.  I have written in all details, except
the name, of course.  The deceased must have been about fifty years old, and he
was apparently in good health. I didn't find either any bodily defects, or
larger birthmarks or scars.  There were no bruises or other signs of violence.
He was killed by one blow on the back of his head, presumably from an iron
hammer, small but heavy.  Four fingers of the left hand have been chopped off,
either directly before or after the murder.  He must have been killed late last
night.'


The coroner scratched his head, then resumed somewhat diffidently:


'I must confess that I am rather puzzled by those missing fingers, sir.  I could
not make out how exactly they were cut off.  The bones of the remaining stumps
are not crushed, the flesh along the cuts is not bruised, and the skin shows no
ragged ends.  The hand must have been spread out on a flat surface, then all
four fingers chopped off at the same time by one blow of some heavy, razor-edged
cutting tool.  If it had been done with a large axe, or a two-handed sword, one
would never have obtained that perfectly straight, clean cut.  I really don't
know what to think!'


Judge Dee glanced through the report.  Looking up, he asked the coroner:


'What about his feet?'


'Their condition pointed to a tramp, sir.  Callosities in the usual places, and
torn toenails.  The feed of a man who walks a great deal, often barefooted.'


'I see.  Did anybody recognize him?'


'No sir.  I was present while the personnel of the tribunal filed past the dead
body.  Nobody had ever seen him before.'


'Thank you.  You may go.'


The headman, who had been waiting in the corridor till the interview was over,
now came in and reported that Mr. Wang, the pharmacist, had arrived.


Judge Dee closed his fan.  'Show him in!' he ordered the headman.


The pharmacist was a small, dapper man with a slight stoop, very neatly dressed
in a robe of black silk and square black cap.  He had a pale, rather reserved
face, marked by a jet-black moustache and goatee.  After he had made his bow,
Judge Dee told him affably:


'Do sit down, Mr. Wang! We are not in the tribunal here.  I am sorry to disturb
you, but I need some information on the situation up on the ridge.  During the
daytime you are always in your shop in the market-place, of course, but I assume
that you pass the evening and night in your mountain villa?'


'Yes indeed, Your Honour,' Wang replied in a cultured, measured voice.  'It's
much cooler up there than here in town, this time of year.'


'Precisely.  I head that some ruffians created a disturbance up there last
night.'


'No, everything was quiet last night, sir.  It is true that all kinds of tramps
and other riff-raff are about there.  They pass the night in the forest, because
they are afraid to enter the city at a late hour when the night watch might
arrest them.  The presence of those scoundrels is the only drawback of that
otherwise most desirable neighbourhood.  Sometimes we hear them shout and
quarrel on the road, but all the villas there, including mine, have high outer
wall, so we need not be afraid of attempt at robbery, and we just ignore them.'


'I would appreciate it if you would also ask your servants, Mr. Wang.  The
disturbance may not have taken place on the highway, but behind your house, in
the wood.'


'I can inform Your Honour now that they haven't seen or heard anything.  I was
at home the entire evening, and none of us went out.  You might ask Mr. Leng,
the pawnbroker, sir.  He lives next door, and he... he keeps rather irregular
hours.'


'Who else is living there, Mr. Wang?'


'At the moment nobody, sir.  There are three more villas, but those belong to
wealthy merchants from the capital who come for their summer holidays only.  All
three are standing empty now.'


'I see.  Well, thank very much, Mr. Wang.  Would you mind going to the mortuary
with the headman?  I want you to have a look at the dead body of a vagabond, and
let me know whether you have seen him in your neighborhood lately.'


After the pharmacist had taken his leave with a low bow, Tao Gan said:


'We must also reckon with the possibility that the man was murdered here in
town, sir.  In a wine house or in a low class brothel.'


Judge Dee shook his head.


'If that had been the case, Tao Gan, they would have hidden the body under the
floor, or thrown it in a dry well.  They would never have dared take the risk of
conveying it to the mountain slope, for then they would have been obliged to
pass close by this tribunal.'  He took the ring from his sleeve again and handed
it to Tao Gan.  'When the coroner came in, I was just about to ask you to go
down into the town and show this ring around in the small pawnshops there.  You
can do so now.  You needn't worry about the routine of the chancery, Tao Gan!  I
shall take care of that, this morning.'


He dismissed his lieutenant wit han encouraging smile, then he began to sort out
the official correspondence that had come in that morning.  He had the dossiers
he needed fetched from the archives, and set to work.  He was disturbed only
once, when the headman came in to report that Mr. Wang had viewed the body and
stated that he did not recognize the dead tramp.


At noon the judge sent for a tray with rice-gruel and salted vegetables and ate
at his desk, attended upon by one of the chancery clerks.  While sipping a cup
of strong tea he went over in his mind the case of the murdered vagabond.  He
slowly shook his head.  Although the facts that had come to light thus far
pointed to a gang murder, he was still groping for another approach. He had to
admit, however, that his doubts rested on flimsy ground: just his impression
that the dead man ad not been a tramp, but an educated, intelligent man, and of
a strong character.  He decided that for the time being he would not communicate
his indecision to his lieutenant.  Tao Gan had been in his service only ten
months, and he was so eager that the judge felt reluctant to discourage him by
questioning the validity of his theory about the significance of the missing
four fingers.  And it would be very wrong to teach him to go by hunches rather
than by facts!


With a sigh Judge Dee set his teacup down and pulled a bulky dossier towards
him.  It contained all the papers relating to the smuggling case in the
neighbouring district of Chiang-pei.  Four days before, the military policy had
surprised three men who were trying to get two boxes across the river that
formed the boundary between the two districts.  The men had fled into the woods
of Chiang-pei, leaving the boxes behind.  They proved to be crammed with small
packages containing gold and silver dust, camphor, mercury, and ginseng - the
costly medicinal root imported from Korea - and all these goods were subject to
a heavy road-tax.  Since the seizure had taken place in Chiang-pei, the case
concerned Judge Dee's colleague, the magistrate of that district.  But he
happened to be short-handed and had requested Judge Dee's assistance.  The judge
had agreed at once, all the more readily since he suspected that the smugglers
had accomplices in his own district.  He had sent his trusted old adviser
Sergeant Hoong to Chiang-pei, together with his two lieutent Ma Joong and Chiao
Tai.  They had established their headquarters in the military guardpost, at the
bridge that crossed the boundary river.


The judge took the sketchmap of the region from the file, and studied it
intently.  Ma Joong and Chiao Tai had scoured the woods with the military
police, and interrogated the peasants living in the fields beyond, without
discovering a single clue.  It was an awkward affair, for the higher authorities
always took a grave view of evasion of the road taxes.  The Prefect, the direct
superior of Judge Dee and his colleague of Chiang-pei, had sent the latter a
peremptory note, stating that he expected quick results.  He had added that cost
of the contraband proved proved that it had not been an incidental attempt by
local smugglers.  They must have a powerful organization behind them that
directed the operations.  The three smugglers were only important in so far as
they could give a lead to the identity of their principal.  The metropolitan
authorities suspected that a leading financier in the capital was the
ringleader.  If this master-criminal was not tracked down, the smuggling would
continue.


Shaking his head the judge poured himself another cup of tea.


Tao Gan came back to the market-place dog-tired and in a very bad temper.  In
the hot and smelly quarter behind the fishmarket down town, he had visited no
less than six pawnshops and silver shops, and also in a few disreputable hostels
and dosshouses.  Nobody had ever seen an emerald ring with two entwined dragons,
nor heard about a gang fight in or outside the city.


He went up the broad stone steps of the Temple of Confucius, crowded with the
stalls of street vendors, and sat down on the bamboo stool in front of the stand
of an oilcake hawker.  Rubbing his sore legs he reflected sadly that he had
failed in the first assignment Judge Dee had given him to carry out alone; for
up to now he had always worked together with Ma Joone and Chiao Tai.  He had
lost this rare chance of proving his mettle!  'It's true,' he told himself,
'that I lack the physical strength and experience in detecting of my colleagues,
but I know as much as they about the ways and byways of the underworld, if not
more!  Why...?'


'This place is meant for business, not for taking a gratis rest!' the cake
vendor told him sourly.  'Besides, your long face keeps other customers away!'


Tao Gan gave him a dirty look and invested five coppers in a handful of
oilcakes.  Those would have to do for his luncheon for he was a very
parsimonious man.  Munching the cakes, he let his eyes rove over the
market-place.  He bestowed and envious look upon the beautiful front of Wang's
pharmacy over on the other side, lavishly decorated with gold lacquer.  The tall
greystone building next door looked simple but dignified.  Over the barred
windows hung a small sign board reading 'Leng's Pawnshop'.


'Vagabonds wouldn't patronize such a high-clas pawnshop.'  Tao Gan muttered.
'But since I am here anyway, I might as well have a look there too.  And Leng
has a villa on the ridge.  He may have heard or seen something  last night.'  He
rose and elbowed his way through the market crowd.


About a dozen neatly dressed customers were standing in front of the high
counter that ran across the high, spacious room, talking busily with the
clerks.  In the rear a large, fat man was sitting at a massive desk, working an
enormous abacus with his white, podgy hands.  He wore a wide grey robe, and a
small black cap.  Tao Gan reached into his capacious sleeve and handed to the
nearest clerk an impressive red visiting-card.  It bore in large letters the
inscription 'Kan Tao, antique gold and silver bought and sold'.  And in the
corner the address: the famous street of jewellers in the capital.  This was one
of the many faked visiting-cards Tao Gan had used during his long career as a
professional swindler; upon entering Judge Dee's service he had been unable to
bring himself to do away with that choice collection.


When the clerk had shown the card to the fat man, he got up at once and came
waddling to the counter.  His round, haughty face was creased in a friendly
smile when he asked:


'And what can we do for you today, sir?'


'I just want some confidential information, Mr. Leng.  A fellow offered me an
emerald ring at only one-third of the value.  I suspect it has been stolen, and
was wondering whether someone might have tried to pawn it here.'


So speaking he took the ring from his sleeve and laid it on the counter.


Leng's face fell.


'No,' he replied curtly, 'never seen it before.'  Then he snapped at the
crossed-eyed clerk who was peeping over his shoulder: 'None of your business!'
To Tao Gan he added: 'Very sorry I can't help you, Mr. Kan!' and went back to
his desk.


The crossed-eyed clerk winked at Tao Gan and pointed with his chin at the door.
Tao Gan nodded and went outside.  Seeing the red-marble bench in the porch of
Wang's pharmacy next door, he sat there to wait.


Through the open window he watched with interest what was going on inside.  Two
shop assistants were turning pills between wooden disks, another was slicing a
thick medicinal root on an iron chopping board by means of the huge cleaver
attached to it by a hinge.  Two of their colleagues were sorting out dried
centipedes and spiders; Tao Gan knew  that these substances, pounded in a mortar
together with the exuviae of cicada and then dissolved in warm wine, made an
excellent cough medicine.


Suddenly he heard footsteps.  The cross-eyes clerk came up to him and sat down
by his side.


'That thick-skulled boss of mine didn't recognize you,' the clerk with a
self-satisfied smirk, 'but I placed you at once! I remember clearly having seen
you in the tribunal, sitting at the table of the clerks!'


'Come to the point!' Tao Gan told him crossly.


'The point is that the fat bastard lied, my dear friend! He had seen that ring
before.  Had it in his hands, at the counter.'


'Well, well.  He has forgotten all about it, I suppose.'


'Not on your life!  That ring was brought to us two days ago, by a damned
good-looking girl.  Just as I was going to ask her whether she wanted to pawn
it, the boss comes up and pushes me away.  He is always after pretty young
women, the old goat!  Well, I watched them, but I couldn't hear what they were
whispering about.  Finally the wench picks up the ring again, and off she went.'


'What kind of a woman was she?'


'Not a lady, that I can tell you!  Dressed in a patched blue jacket and
trousers, like a scullery maid.  Holy heaven, if I were rich I wouldn't mind
having a maid like that about the house, not a bit!  Wasn't she a stunner!
Anyway, my boss is a crook, I tell you.  He's mixed up in all kinds of shady
deals, and he also cheats with his taxes.'


'You don't seem very fond your boss.'


'You should know how he's sweating us!  And he and that snooty son of his keep
their eyes on me and my clooeagues all the time, fat chance we have to make any
money on the side!'  The clerk heaved a deep sigh, then resumed, business-like:
'If the tribunal pays me ten coppers a day, I shall collect evidence on his tax
evasion.  For the information I gave you just now, twenty-five coppers will do.'


Tao Gan rose and patted the other's shoulder.


'Carry on, my boy!' he told him cheerfully.  'Then you'll also become a big fat
bully in due time, working an enormous abacus.'  Then he added sternly: 'If I
need you I'll send for you.  Good bye!'


The disappointed clerk scurried back to the pawn shop.  Tao Gan followed him at
a more sedate pace.  Inside he rapped on the counter with his bony knuckles and
peremptorily beckoned the portly pawnbroker.  Showing him his identity document
bearing the large red stamp of the tribunal, he told him curtly:


'You'll have to come with me to the tribunal, Mr. Leng.  His Excellency the
magistrate wants to see you.  No, there is no need to change.  That grey dress
of yours is very becoming.  Hurry up, I don't have all day!'


They were carried to the tribunal in Leng's luxurious paded palankeen.


Tao Gan told the pawnbroker to wait in the chancery.  Leng let himself down
heavily on the bench in the anteroom and at once began to fan himself vigorously
with a large silk fan.  He jumped up when Tao Gan came to fetch him.


'What is is all about, sir?' he asked worriedly.


Tao Gan gave him a pitying look.  He was thoroughly enjoying himself.


'Well,' he said slowly, 'I can't talk about official business, of course.  But
I'll say this much: I am glad I am not in your shoes, Mr. Leng!'


When the sweating pawnbroker was ushered in by Tao Gan into Judge Dee's office,
and he saw the judge sitting behind his desk, he fell onto his knees and began
to knock his forehead on the floor.


'You may skip the formalities, Mr. Leng!' Judge Dee told him coldly. 'Sit down
and listen!  It is my duty to warn you that if you don't answer my questions
truthfully, I shall have to interrogate you in court.  Speak up, where were you
last night?'


'Merciful Heaven!  So it is just as I  feared!'  the fat man exclaimed.  'It was
just that I had had a few drops too much, Excellency!  I swear it! When I was
closing up, my old friend Chu the goldsmith dropped in and invited me to have a
drink in the winehouse on the corner.  We had two jugs, sir!  At the most!  I
was still steady on my legs.  The old man told you that, I suppose?'


Judge Dee nodded.  He didn't have the faintest idea what the excited man was
talking about.  If Leng had said he was at home the previous night the judge had
planned to ask him whether there had been a commotion on the ridge, and then he
would have confronted him with his lying about the emerald ring.  Now he told
curtly: 'I want to hear everything again, from your own mouth!'


'Well, after I had taken leave of my friend Chu, Excellency, I told my palankeen
bearers to carry me up to my villa on the ridge.  When we were rounding the
corner of your tribunal here, a band of young rascals, grown-up gutter-snipes,
began to jeer at me.  As a rule I don't pay any attention to that kind of
things, but... well, as I said, I was... Anyway, I got angry and told my bearers
to put the palankeen down and teach the scum a lesson. Then suddenly that old
vagabond appears.  He kicks against my palankeen and starts calling me a dirty
tyrant.  Well, I mean a man in my position can't take that lying down!  I step
from my palankeen and I give the old scoundrel a push.  Just a push,
Excellency. He falls down, and remains lying there on his back.'


The pawnbroker produced a large silk handkerchief and rubbed his moist face.


'Did his head bleed?' the judge asked.


'Bleed? Of course not, sir!  He fell on to the soft shoulder of the mud road.
But I should've had a good look, of course, to see whether he was all right.
However, those young hoodlums began to shout again, so I  jumped in my palankeen
and told the bearers to carry me away. It was only when I was about half way up
the road to the ridge, and when the evening breeze had cooled my head a bit,
that I realized that the old trampo might have had a heart attack.  So I stepped
out and told the bearers that I would walk a bit and that they could go on ahead
to the villa.  Then I walked downhill, back to the place of the quarrel.
But...'


'Why didn't you simply tell your chair bearers to take you back there?' Judge
Dee interrupted.


The pawnbroker looked embarrassed.


'Well, sir, you know what those coolies are nowadays.  If that tramp had really
fallen ill, I wouldn't want my bearers to know that, you see.  Those impudent
rascals aren't beyond trying a bit of blackmail... Anyway, when I came to the
street corner here, the old tramp was nowhere to be seen.  A hawker told me that
the old scoundrel had scrambled up again shortly after I had left.  He had said
some very bad things about me, then he took the road to the ridge, as chipper as
can be!'


'I see.  What did you do next?'


'I? Oh, I rented a chair, and was carried home.  But the incident had upset my
stomach, and when I descended in front of my gate, I suddenly became very ill.
Fortunately Mr. Wang and his son were just coming back from a walk, and his son
carried me inside.  Strong as an ox, that boy is.  Well, then I went straight to
bed.'  He again mopped his face before he concluded: 'I fully realized that I
shouldn't have laid hands on that old vagabond, Excellency. And now he had
lodged a complaint, of course.  Well, I am prepared to pay any indemnity, within
reason, of course, and...'


Judge Dee had risen.


'Come with me, Mr. Leng,' he said evenly,  'I want to show you something.'


The judge left the office, followed by Tao Gan and the bewildered pawnbroker.
In the courtyard the judge told the headman to take them to the mortuary in the
gatehouse.  He led them to a musty room, bare except for a deal table on
trestles, covered with a reed mat.  The judge lifted up the end of the mat, and
asked:


'Do you know this man, Mr. Leng?'


After one look at the old tramp's face, Leng shouted:


'He is dead!  Holy Heaven, I killed him!'


He fell on his knees and wailed: 'Mercy, Excellency, have mercy!  It was an
accident, I swear it! I...'


'You'll be given an opportunity to explain when you are standing trial,' Judge
Dee told coldly.  'Now we'll go back to my office, for I am not yet through with
you, Mr. Leng.  Not by a long shot!'


Back in his private office the judge sat down behind his desk and motioned Tao
Gan to take the stool in front.  Leng was not invited to be seated so he had to
remain standing there, under the watchful eye of the headman.


Judge Dee silently studied him for a while, slowly caressing his long
sidewhiskers.  Then he sat up, took the emerald ring from his sleeve and asked:


'Why did you tell my assitant that you had never seen this ring before?'


Leng stared at the ring with raised eyebrows.  He did not seem much disturbed by
Judge Dee's sudden question.


'I couldn't have known that this gentleman belonged to the tribunal, could I,
sir?' he asked, annoyed. 'Otherwise I would have told him, of course.  But the
ring reminded me of a rather unpleasant experience, and I didn't feel like
discussing that with a complete stranger.'


'All right.  Now tell me who that young woman was.'


Leng shrugged his round shoulders.


'I really couldn't tell you, sir!  She was dressed rather poorly, and she
belonged to a band of vagabonds for the tip of her litter finger was missing.
But a good-looking wench.  Very good-looking, I must say.  Well, she puts the
ring on the table and asks what it's worth.  It's a nice antique piece, as you
can see for yourself, sir, worth about six silver pieces.  Ten, perhaps, to a
collector.  So I tell her, "I can let you have here and now one good shining
silver piece if you want to pawn it, and two if you sell it outright." Business
is business, isn't it?  Even if your customer happens to be a pretty piece of
goods.  But does she take my offer?  No sir!  She snatches the ring from my
hands, snaps "Not for sale!" and off she goes.  And that was the last I saw of
her.'


'I heard a quite different story,' Judge Dee said dryly.  'Speak up, what were
you two whispering about?'


Leng's face turned red.


'So my clerk, those good-for-nothings, have been spying on me again!  Well, then
you'll understand how awkward it was, sir.  I asked her only  because I thought
that such a good-looking girl from up-country, all alone in this town... well,
that she might meet the wrong people, and...'


Judge Dee hit his fist on the table.


'Don't stand there twaddling, man!  Tell me exactly what you said!'


'Well,' Leng replied with a sheepish look, 'I proposed that we should meet later
in a tea house near by, and... and I patted her hand a bit, just to assure her I
meant well, you know.  The wench suddenly flew into a rage, said that if I
didn't stop bothering her, she would call her brother who was waiting outside.
Then... then she rushed off.'


'Quite. Headman, put this man under lock and key.  The charge is manslaugher.'


The headman grabbed the protesting pawnbroker and took him outside.


'Pour me another cup of tea, Tao Gan.'  Judge Dee said.  'A curious story!  And
did you notice the discrepancy between Leng's account of his meeting with the
girl and that given by his clerk?'


'I did, sir!' Tao Gan said eagerly.  'That wretched clerk said nothing about
their having a quarrel at the counter.  According to him they held a whispered
conversation.  I think that in fact the girl accepted Leng's proposal, sir.  The
quarrel Leng spoke of occurred afterwards, in the house of assignation.  And
that is why Leng murdered the old tramp!'


Judge Dee, who had been slowly sipping his tea, now put his cup down.  Leaning
back in his chair, he said: 'Develop your theory further, Tao Gan!'


'Well, this time Leng's philandering led to serious trouble!  For the girl, her
brother and the old tramp belonged to one and the same organized gang; the girl
was their call bird.  As soon as Leng had arrived in the house of assignation
and began to make up to the girl, she shouted that he was assaulting her - the
old, familiar trick.  Her brother and the old tramp came rushing inside, and
demanded money.  Leng succeeded in escaping.  When he was on his way to the
ridge, however, the old tramp waylaid him and tried to make Leng pay up by
making a scene in the street. Leng's bearers were beating up the young hoodlums,
so they couldn't hear what Leng and the old man were quarrelling about.  Leng
silenced the tramp by knocking him down.  What do you think of that as a theory,
sir?'


'Plausible, and in perfect accordance with Leng's character.  Continue!'


'While Leng was being carried up to the ridge he did indeed become worried.  Not
about the condition of the old tramp, however, but about the other members of
the gang.  He was afraid that when they found the old tramp, they would come
after him to take revenge. When the hawker told Leng that the tramp had taken
the road uphill, Leng followed him.  About half way up he struck him down from
behind, with a sharp piece of rock, or perhaps the hilt of his dagger.'


Tao Gan paused.  When the judge nodded encouragingly, he resumed:


'It was comparatively easy for Leng, who is a powerful fellow and perfectly
familiar with that area, to carry the dead body to the deserted hut.  And Leng
also had a good reason for cutting off his victim's fingers, namely to hide the
fact that the man was a member of a gang.  But as to where and how Leng cut off
the fingers, I confess that that is a complete riddle to me, sir.'


Judge Dee sat up straight. Stroking his long black beard, he said with a smile:


'You did very well indeed.  You have a logical mind, and at the same time strong
powers of imagination, a combination that'll go a long way to make you a good
investigator!  I shall certainly keep your theory in mind.  However, its weak
point is that it is based entirely on the assumption that the eyewitness account
of the clerk regarding the meeting in the pawnshop is absolutely correct.  But
when I mentioned the discrepancy between the two accounts just now, my intention
was to quote it as an example of how little trust can be put in eyewitness
accounts.  As a matter of fact, it is too early yet to formulate theories, Tao
Gan.  First we must verify the facts we have, and try to discover additional
data.'


Noticing Tao Gan's crestfallen look, Judge Dee went on quickly:


'Thanks to your excellent work this afternoon, we now have at our disposal three
well-established facts.  First, that a beautiful vagabond girl is connected with
the ring.  Second, that she has a brother; for no matter what really happened,
Leng had no earthly reason to invent a brother.  And third, that there is a
connection between the girl, her brother and the murdered man.  Probably they
belonged to the same gang, and if so, it probably was a gang from outside this
district; for none of our personnel knew the dead man by sight, and Leng thought
the girl was from up-country.


'So now your next step is to locate the girl and her brother.  That shouldn't be
too difficult, for a vagabond girl of such striking beauty will attract
attention.  As a rule the women who join those gangs are cheap prostitutes.'


'I could ask the Chief of the Beggars, sir!  He is a clever old scoundrel, and
fairly co-operative.'


'Yes, that's a good idea.  While you are busy in the town, I shall check Leng's
story.  I shall interrogate that rascally clerk of his, his friend goldsmith
Chu, and his chair bearers.  I shall also order the headman to locate one or
more of the yound hoodlums who jeered at Leng, and the hawker who saw the old
man scramble up.  Finally I shall ask Mr. Wang whether Leng was really dead
drunk when he came home.  All these routine jobs would be meat and drink to old
Hoong, Ma Joong and Chiao Tai, but since they are away I'll gladly take care of
them myself.  This work will help me considerably.  Well, set to work, and
success!'


---


The only occupant of the smelly taproom of the Red Carp was the greybeard who
stood behind the high counter.  He wore a long, shabby blue gown, and had a
greasy black skull cap on his head.  His long, wrinkle face was adorned by a
ragged moustache and a spiky chinbeard.  Staring into the distance he was
moodily picking his broken teeth.  His busy time would come late in the night,
when his beggars gathered there in order to pay him his share of their
earnings.  The old man looked on silently while Tao Gan poured himself uninvited
a cup of wine from the cracked earthen ware pot.  Then he quickly grabbed the
pot, and put it away under the counter.


'You had quite a busy morning, Mr. Tao,' he croaked.  'Asking about gang fights,
and golden rings.'


Tao Gan nodded.  He knew that the greybeard's omni-present beggars kept him
informed about everything that went on downtown.  He put his wine cup down and
said cheerfully:


'That's why I got the afternoon off!  I was thinking of amusing myself a bit.
Not with a professional, mind you.  With a free-lance!'


'Very clever!' the greybeard commented sourly.  'So as to turn her in afterwards
for practising without a licence.  Have your fun gratis, and on top of that a
bonus from the tribunal!'


'What do you take me for?  I want a free-lance, and from out of town, because I
have to think of my reputation.'


'Why should you, Mr. Tao?' the Chief of the Beggars asked blandly.  'Your
reputation being what it is?'


Tao Gan decided to let the barbed remark pass.  He said pensively:


'Something young, and pretty.  But cheap, mind you!'


'You'll have to prove that you'll appreciate my advice, Mr. Tao!'


The greybeard watched Tao Gan as he laboriously counted out five coppers on the
counter, but he made no move to take the money.  With a deep sigh Tao Gan added
five more.  Now the old man scooped them up with his claw-like hand.


'Go to the Inn of the Blue Clouds,' he mutterd.  'Two streets down, the fourth
house on your left.  Ask for Seng Kiu.  He's her brother, and he concludes the
deals, I am told.'  He gave Tao Gan a thoughtful look, then added with a
lopsided grin: 'You'll like Seng Kiu, Mr. Tao!  A straightforward, open-minded
man.  And very hospitable. Have a good time, Mr. Tao.  You really deserve it!'


Tao Gan thanked him and went out.


He walked as quickly as the irregular cobblestones of the narrow alley would
allow, for he did not put it beyond the greybeard to send one of his beggars
ahead to the inn to warn Seng Kiu that a minion of the law was on his way.


The Inn of the Blue Clouds was a miserable small place, wedged in between the
shops of a fishmonger a vegetable dealer.  In the dimly lit space at the bottom
of the narrow staircase a fat man sat dozing in a bamboo chair.  Tao Gan poked
him hard in his ribs with his thin, bony forefinger and growled:


'I want Seng Kiu!'


'You may have him and keep him!  Upstairs, second door!  Ask him when he's going
to pay the rent!'  When Tao Gan was about to ascend, the man, who had taken in
his frail stooping figure, called out: 'Wait! Have a look at my face!'


Tao Gan saw that his left eye was closed, the cheek swollen and discoloured.


'That's Seng Kiu for you!!' the man said.  'Mean bastard!'


'How many are they?'


'Three.  Besides Seng Kiu and his sister there's his friend Chang.  Also a mean
bastard.  There was a fourth, but he has cleared out.'


Tao Gan nodded.  While climbing the stairs he reflected with a wry smile that he
now knew the reason for the greybeard's secret amusement.  He would get even
with that old rascal, some day!


After he had rapped his knuckles vigorously on the door indicated, a raucous
voice called out from inside:


'Tomorrow you'll get your money, you son of a dog.'


Tao Gan pushed the door open and walked inside.  On either side of the bare,
dingly room stood a plank-bed.  On the one one the right lay a giant of a man,
clad in a patched brown jacket and trousers.  He had a broad, bloated face,
surrounded by a bristling short beard.  His hair was bound up with a dirty rag.
On the other bed a long, wiry man lay snoring loudly, his muscular arms folded
under his closely cropped head.  In front of the window sat a good-looking young
woman mending a jacket.  She wore only a pair of wide blue trousers, her shapely
torso was bare.


'Maybe I could help with the rent, Sent Kiu,' Tao Gan said.  He pointed with his
chin at the girl.


The giant scrambled up. He looked Tao Gan up and down with his small bloodshot
eyes, scratching his hairy breast.  Tao Gan noticed that the tip of his left
letter finger was missing.  His scrutiny completed, the giant asked gruffly:
'How much?'


'Fifty coppers.'


Seng Kiu woke up the other by a kick against his leg that was dangling over the
foot of the bed.


'This kind old gentleman,' he informed him, 'wants to lend us fifty coppers,
because he likes our faces.  The trouble is that I don't like his!'


'Take his money and kick him out!' the girl told her brother.  'No need to beat
him up, the scarecrow is ugly enough as it is.'


The giant swung round to her.


'None of your business!' he barked. 'You shut up and stay shut up!  You bungled
that affair with Uncle Twan, couldn't even get that emerald ring of his!
Useless slut!'


She came to her feet with amazing speed and kicked him hard against his shins.
He promptly gave her a blow to her stomach.  She folded double, gasping for
air.  But that was only a trick, for when he came for her, she quickly thrust
her head into his midriff.  As he stepped back, she pulled a long hairpin from
her coiffure and asked venomously:


'Want to get that into your gut, dear brother?'


Tao Gan was thinking how he could get these three to the tribunal.  Since they
probably weren't very familiar with the city yet, he thought he would manage it.


'I'll settle with you later!' Seng Kiu promised his sister.  And to his friend:
'Grab the bastard, Chang!'


While Chang was keeping Tao Gan's arms pinned behind his back in a iron grip,
Seng Kiu expertly searched him.


'Yes, only fifty coppers!' he said with disgust.  'You hold him while I teach
him not to disturb our sleep!'


He took a long bamboo stick from the corner and made to hit Tao Gan on his
head.  But suddenly he half turned and let the end come down on the behind of
his sister, who was bending over her jacket again.  She jumped aside with a yell
of pain.  Her brother bellowed with laughter.  But then he had to duck, for she
threw the heavy iron scissors at his head.


'I don't like interrupting,' Tao Gan said dryly, 'but there's a deal of five
silver pieces I wanted to discuss.'


The giant who had been trying to get hold of his sister now let her go.  He
turned round and asked panting:


'Five silver pieces, you said?'


'It's a very private matter, just between you and me.'


Seng Kiu gave a sign to Chang to let Tao Gan go.  The thin man drew the tall
ruffian into the corner and told him in a low voice:


'I don't care a fig about that sister of yours.  It's my boss who sent me!'


Seng Kiu went pale under his tan.


'Does the Baker want five silver pieces?  Holy Heaven, has he gone mad?
How...?'


'I don't know any baker,' Tao Gan said crossly.  'My boss is a big landowner, a
wealthy lecher who pays well for his little amusements.  He has got fed up with
all those dainty damsels from the Willow Quarter nowadays.  Suddenly he wants
them buxom and rough-and-ready like.  I do the collecting for him.  He has heard
about your sister, and he has sent me to offer you five silver pieces for having
her in the house a couple of days.'


Seng Kiu had  been listening with growing astonishment.  Now he exclaimed:


'Are you crazy?  There isn't a woman in the whole wide world who has got
something to sell worth that much!'  He thought deeply for a while, creasing his
low forehead.  Suddenly he burst out: 'That proposal of yours stinks, brother!
I want my sister to kee pa whole skin.  I am planning to set her up in business,
you see?  So she gets me a regular income.'


Tao Gan shrugged his narrow shoulders.


'All right.  There are other vagabond girls on the loose.  Give me back my fifty
coppers, then I'll say good bye!'


'Hey there, not so fast!'  The giant rubbed his face. 'Five silver pieces!  That
means living nicely for at least a year, without doing a stroke of work!  Well,
it doesn't matter much really whether she's handled a bit roughly, after all.
She can stand a lot, and it'll cut her down to size, maybe.  All right, it's a
deal!  But me and Chang are going to see her off.  I want to know where and with
whom she is staying.'


'So that you can blackmail my boss later, eh?  Nothing doing!'


'You are lying!  You are a buyer for a brothel, you dirty rat!'


'All right, come with me then and see for yourself.  But don't blame me if my
boss gets angry and has his men beat you up.  Pay me twenty coppers, that's my
commission.'


After protracted haggling, they agreed on ten coppers. Seng Kiu gave Tao Gan his
fifty coppers back, and ten extra.  The gaunt man put these in his sleeve with a
satisfied smile, for now he had recovered the money he had paid the Chief of the
Beggars.


'The boss of this fellow wants to stand us a drink,' Seng Kiu told Chang and his
sister.  'Let's go to this place and hear what he has got to say.'


They went up town by the main road, but then Tao Gan took them through a maze of
narrow alleys to the back of a tall greystone compound.  As he opened the small
iron door with a key he took from his sleeve, Seng Kiu remarked, impressed:


'Your boss must be rolling in it!  Substantial property!'


'Very substantial,' Tao Gan agreed.  'And this is only the back entrance, mind
you.  You should see the main gate!'  So speaking, he herded them into a long
corridor.  He carefully relocked the door and said: 'Just wait here a moment
while I go to inform my boss!'


He disappeared round the corner.


After a while the girl exclaimed:


'I don't like the smell of this place.  Could be a trap!'


Then the headman and six armed guards came tramping round the corner.  Chang
cursed and groped for his knife.


'Please attack us!' the headman told him with a grin, raising his sword.  'Then
we'll get a bonus for cutting you down!'


'Leave it, Chang!' the giant told his friend disgustedly.  'These bastards are
professional murderers.  They get paid for killing the poor.'


The girl tried to slip past the headman, but he caught her and soon she also was
in chains.  They were taken to the jail in the adjoining building.




----


After Tao Gan had run to the guardhouse and told the headman to arrest two
vagabonds and their wench who were waiting near the back door, he went straight
to the chancery and asked the senior clerk where he could find Judge Dee.


'His Excellency is in his office, Mr. Tao.  Since the noon rice he has
interrogated a number of people there.  Just when he had let them go, young
Mr. Leng, the son of the pawnbroker, came and asked to see the judge.  He hasn't
come out yet.'


'What is that youngster doing here?  He wasn't on the list of people the judge
wanted to interrogate.'


'I think he came to find out why his father had been arrested, Mr. Tao.  It
might interest you to know that, before he went inside, he had been asking the
guards at the gate all kinds of questions about the dead body that was found
this morning in the hut in the forest.  You might tell the judge.'


'Thank you, I will.  Those guards are not supposed to hand out information,
though!'


The old clerk shrugged his shoulders.


'They all know young Mr. Leng, sir.  They often go there towards the end of the
month to pawn something or other, since the entire personnel has seen the body,
it isn't much of a secret any more.'


Tao Gan nodded and walked on to Judge Dee's office.


The judge was sitting behind his desk, now wearing a comfortable robe of thin
grey cotton, and wit ha square black cap on his head.  In front of the desk
stood s well-built young man of about twenty-five, clad in a neat brown robe and
wearing a flat black cap.  He had a handsome but rather reserved face.


'Take a seat! '  Judge Dee told Tao Gan.  'This is Mr. Leng's eldest son.  He is
worried about his father's arrest.  I just explained to him that I suspect his
father of having taken part in the murder of an old vagrant, and that I shall
hear the case at tonight's session of the court.  That's all I can say.
Mr. Leng.  I have to terminate our interview now, for I have urgent matters to
discuss with my lieutenant here.'


'My father couldn't possibly have committed a murder last night, sir,' the
youngster said quietly.


Judge Dee raised his eyebrows.


'Why?'


'For the simple reason that my father was dead drunk, sir.  I myself opened the
door when Mr. Wang brought him in.  My father had passed out, and Mr. Wang's son
had to carry him inside.'


'All right, Mr. Leng.  I shall keep this point in mind.'


Young Leng made no move to take his leave.  He cleared his throat and resumed,
rather diffidently this time:


'I think I have seen the murderers, sir.'


Judge Dee leaned forward in his chair.


'I want a complete statement about that!' he said sharply.


'Well, sir, it is rumoured that the dead body of a tramp was found this morning
in a deserted hut in the forest, half way up the slope. May I ask whether that
is correct?'  As the judge nodded, he continued: 'Last night a bright moon was
in the sky and there was a cool evening breeze, so I thought I would take a
little walk.  I took the footpath behind our house that leads down into the
forest.  After having passed the second bend, I saw two people some distance
ahead of me.  I couldn't see them very well, but one seemed very tall, and he
was carrying a heavy load on his shoulders.  The other was small, and rather
slender. Since all kind of riff-raff often frequents the forest at night, I
decided to call off my walk, and went back home.  When I heard the rumour about
the dead tramp, it occurred to me that the burden the tall person was carrying
might well have been the dead body.'


Tao Gan tried to catch Judge Dee's eye, for Leng's description fitted exactly
Seng Kiu and his sister.  But the judge was looking intently at his visitor.
Suddenly he said:


'This means that I can set your father free at once, and arrest you as suspect
in his stead!  For you have just proved beyond doubt that, whereas your father
could not have committed the murder, you yourself had every opportunity!'


The youngster stared dumbfounded at the judge.


'I didn't do it!' he burst out.  'I can prove it!  I have a witness who...'


'Just as I thought! You weren't alone.  A young man like you doesn't go out for
a solitary walk in the forest at night.  It's only when you have reached a riper
age that you discover that enjoyment.  Speak up, who was the girl?'


'My mother's chambermaid,' the young man replied with a red face.  'We can't see
much of each other inside the house, of course.  So we meet now and then in the
hut, down the slope.  She can bear out my statement that we went into the forest
together, but she can't give more information about the people I saw, because I
was walking ahead and she didn't see them.' Giving the judge a shy look he
added: 'We plan to get married, sir.  But if my father knew that we...'


'All right. Go to the chancery, and let the senior clerk take down your
statement.  I shall use it only if absolutely neccessary.  You may go!'


As the youngster made to take his leave, Tao Gan asked:


'Could that smaller figure you saw have been a girl?'


Young Leng scratched his head.


'Well, I couldn't see them very well, you know.  Now that you ask me,
however... Yes, it might have been a woamn, I think.'


As soon as young Leng had gone, Tao Gan began excitedly:


'Everything is clear now, sir! I...'


Judge Dee raised his hand.


'One moment, Tao Gan.  We must deal with this complecated case methodically.  I
shall first tell you the result of my routine check.  First, that clerk of
Leng's is a disgusting specimen.  Close questioning proved that, after he had
seen the girl place the ring on the counter, Leng told him to make himself
scarce.  Other customers came in between them, and later he only saw the girl
snatch up the ring and go out.  The whipering bit he made up, in order to prove
that his boss is a lecher.  And as to his boss being guilty of tax-evasion, he
could only quote vague rumours.  I dismissed the fellow withe the reminder that
there's a law on slander, and sent for the master of the Banker'g Guild.  He
told me that Mr Leng is a very wealthy man who likes to do himself well.  He is
not averse to a bit of double-dealing, and one has to look sharp when doing
business with him, but he is careful to keep on the right side of the law.  He
travels a lot, however, passing much of his time in the neightbouring district
of Chiang-pei; and the guildmaster did not, of course, know anything about his
activities there.  Second, Leng did indeed have a heavy drinking bout with his
friend the goldsmith.  Third, the headman has located two of the young hoodlums
who jeered at Leng.  They said that this was obviously the first time Leng had
seen the old tramp, and that no girl was mentioned during their quarrel.  Leng
did push the old man, but he was on his feet again directly after Leng had been
carried off in his chair.  He stood there cursing Leng for a blasted tyrant,
then he walked off.  Finally, those boys made one curious remark.  They said
that the old man didn't speak like a tramp at all, he used the language of a
gentleman.  I had planned to ask Mr. Wang whether Mr. Leng was really drunk when
he came home, but after what his son told us just now, that doesn't seem
neccessary any more.'


The judge emptied his tea cup, then added: 'Tell me now how it went down town.'


'I must first tell you, sir, that young Leng questioned the guards thoroughly
about the discovery of the body in the hut, prior to seeing you.   However,that
seems immaterial now, for I have proof that he did not make up the story about
the two people he saw in the forest.'


Judge Dee nodded.


'I didn't think he was lying.  The boy impressed me as very honest.  Much better
than that father of his.'


'The people he saw must have been a gangster called Seng Kiu, and his sister - a
remarkably beautiful young girl.  The Chief of the Beggars directed me to the
inn where they were staying, together with another plug-ugly called Chang.
There was a fourth man, but he had left.  I heard Seng Kiu scolding his sister
for having spoiled what he called "the affair of Uncle Twan", and for having
failed to obtain his emerald ring.  Evidently that Uncle Twan is our dead
tramp.  All three are from another district, but they know a gangster boss
called the Baker here.  I had them locked up in jail, all three of them.'


'Excellent!' Judge Dee exclaimed.  'How did you get them here so quickly?'


'Oh,' Tao Gan replied vaguely,  'I told them a story about easy money to be made
here, and they came along gladly.  As to my theory about Mr. Leng,sir, you were
quite right in calling it premature! Leng had nothing to do with the murder.  It
was pure coincidence that the gangsters crossed his path twice.  First when the
girl wanted the ring appraised, and the second time when the old tramp took
offence at Leng's high-handed way of dealing with the young hoodlums.'


The judge made no comment.  He pensively tugged at his moustache.  Suddenly he
said:


'I don't like coincidences, Tao Gan.  I admit they do occur, now and then.  But
I always begin by distrusting them.  By the way, you said that Seng Kiu
mentioned a gangster boss called the Baker.  Before I interrogate him, I want
you to ask our headman what he knows about that man.'


While Tao Gan was gone, the judge poured himself another cup from the tea basket
on his desk.  He idly wondered how his lieutenant had managed to get those three
gangsters to the tribunal.  'He was remarkably vague when I asked him,' he told
himself with a wry smile .  'Probably he has been acting the part of confidence
man again - his old trade!  Well, as long as it is in a good case...'


Tao Gan came back.


'The headman knew the Baker quite well by name, sir.  But he is not of this
town; the scoundrel is a notorious gangster boss in our neighbouring district,
Chiang-pei.  That means that Seng Kiu is from there too.'


'And our friend Mr. Leng often stays there,' the judge said slowly.  'We are
getting too many coincidences for my liking, Tao Gan!  Well, I shall interrogate
those people separately, beginning with Seng Kiu.  Tell the headman to take him
to the mortuary - without showing him the dead body, of course.  I'll go there
presently.'


---


When Judge Dee came in he saw the tall figure of Seng Kiu standing between two
constables, in front of the table on which the corpse was lying, covered by the
reed mat.  There hung a sickly smell in the bare room.  The judge reflected that
it wouldn't do to leave the body there too long, in this hot weather.  He folded
the mat back and asked Seng Kiu:


'Do you know this man?'


'Holy Heaven, that's him!' Seng shouted.


Judge Dee folded his arms in his wide sleeves.  He spoke harshly:


'Yes, that's the dead body of the old man you cruelly did to death.'


The gangster burst out in a string of curses.  The constable on his right hit
him over his head with his beavy club.  'Confess!' he barked at him.  The blow
didn't seem to bother the giant much.  He just shook his head, then shouted:


'I didn't kill him!  The old fool was still alive and kicking when he left the
inn last night!'


'Who was he?'


'A rich fool, called Twan Mou-tsai.  Owned a big drugstore, in the capital.'


'A rich drug dealer?  What was his business with you?'


'He was gone on my sister, the silly old goat!  He wanted to join us!'


'Don't try to foist your stupid lies on me, my friend!' Judge Dee said coldly.
The constable hit out at Seng Kiu's head again, but he ducked expertly and
blurted out:


'It's the truth, I swear it!  He was crazy about my sister!  Even wanted to pay
for being allowed to join us!  But my sister, the silly wench, she wouldn't take
one copper from him.  And look at the trouble the stubborn little strumpet has
got us in now!  A murder, if you please!'


Judge Dee smoothed down his long beard.  The man was an uncouth brute, but his
words bore the hallmark of truth.  Seng Kiu interpreted his silence as a sign of
doubt, and resumed in a whining voice:


'Me and my mate, we have never done anything like murder, noble lord!  Maybe we
took along a stray chicken or a pig here and there, or borrowed a handful of
coppers from a traveller - such things will happen when you have to make your
living by the road.  But we never killed a man, I tell you.  And why should I
kill Uncle Twan, of all people?  I told you he gave me money, didn't I?'


'Is your sister a prostitute?'


'A what?' Seng Kiu asked suspiciously.


'A streetwalker.'


'Oh, that!' Seng scratched his head, then replied cautiously: 'Well, to tell you
the truth, sir, she is and she isn't, so to speak.  If we need money badly, she
may take on a fellow, on occasion.  But most of the time she only takes
youngsters she fancies, and they get it gratis for nothing.  Dead capital,
that's what she is, sir!  Wish she were a regular, then she'd bring in some
money at least!  If you'd kindly tell me, sir, how to go about getting proper
papers for her, those things that say she has the right to walk the street,
and...'


'Only answer my questions!' Judge Dee interrupted him testily.  'Speak up, when
did you begin working for Leng the pawnbroker?'


'A pawnbroker?  Not me, sir I don't deal with those bloodsuckers!  My boss is
Lew the Baker, of Chiang-pei.  Lives over the winehouse, near the west gate.  He
was our boss, that is.  We bought ourselves out.  Me, Sis and Chang.'


Judge Dee nodded.  He knew that, according to the unwritten rules of the
underworld, a sworn member of a gang can sever relations with his boss if he
pays a certain sum of money, from which his original entrance fee, and his share
in the earnings of the gang are deduced.  This settling of accounts often gave
rise to bitter quarrels.


'Was everything settled to the satisfaction of both parties?' he asked.


'Well, there was a bit of trouble, sir.  The Baker tried to rob us, the mean son
of a dog!  But Uncle Twan, he was a real wizard with figures.  He takes a piece
of paper, does a bit of reckoning, and proves the Baker is dead wrong.  The
Baker didn't like that, but there were a couple of other fellows who had been
following the argument, and they all said Uncle Twan was right.  So the Baker
had to let us go.'


'I see.  Why did you want to leave the Baker's gang?'


'Because the Baker was getting too uppety, and because he was taking on jobs we
didn't fancy.  Jobs above our station, so to speak.  The other day he wanted me
and Chang to lend a hand putting two boxes across the boundary.  I said no,
never.  First, if we get caught, we are in for big trouble.  Second, the men who
did those kind of big jobs for the Baker usually died in accidents afterwards.
Accidents will happen, of course.  But they happened too often, for my taste.'


The judge gave Tao Gan a signifcant look.


'When you and Chang refused, who took on the job?'


'Ying, Meng and Lau,' Seng replied promptly.


'Where are they now?'


Seng passed his thumb across his throat.


'Just accidents, mind you!' he said with a grin.  But there was a glint of fear
in his small eyes.


'To whom were those two boxes to be delivered?' the judge asked again.


The gangster shrugged his broad shoulders.


'Heaven knows!  I overheard the Baker telling Ying something about a richard who
has a big store in the market-place here.  I didn't ask, it wasn't my business,
the less I knew about it the better.  And Uncle Twan said I was dead right.'


'Where were you last night?'


'Me?  I went with Sis and Chang to the Red Carp, for a bite and a little dice
game.  Uncle Twan said he'd eat somewhere outside, he didn't fancy dice games.
When we came home at midnight, the old man hadn't come back.  The poor old
geezer got his head bashed in!  He shouldn't have gone out alone, in a town he
didn't know!'


Judge Dee took the emerald ring from his sleeve.


'Do you know this trinket?' he asked.


'Of course!  That was Uncle Twan's ring.  Had it from his father. "Ask him to
give it to you!" I told Sis.  But she said no.  It's hard luck, sir, to be
cursed with a sister like her!'


'Take this man back to his cell!' Judge Dee ordered the headman.  'Then tell the
matron to bring Miss Seng to my office.'


While crossing the courtyard, the judge said excitedly to Tao Gan:


'You made a very nice haul!  This is the first clue we've got to the smuggling
case!  I shall send a special messenger to my colleague in Chiang-pei at once,
asking him to arrest the Baker.  He will tell who his principal is, and to whom
the boxes were to be delivered here.  I wouldn't be astonished if that man
turned out to be our friend Leng the pawnbroker!  He is a wealthy man with a
large store in the market-place, and he visits Chiang-pei regularly.'


'Do you think that Seng Kiu is really innocent of Twan's murder, sir?  That
story told by Leng's son seemed to fit him and his sister all right.'


'We shall know more about that when we have discovered the truth about that
enigmatic Twan Mou-tsai, Tao Gan.  I had the impression that Seng Kiu told us
all he knew just now.  But there must be many things that Seng does not know!
We shall see what his sister has to say.'


They had entered the chancery.  The senior scribe rose hurriedly and came to
meet them.  Handing the judge a document, he said:


'I happened to overhear Mr. Tao asking our headman about a gangster called Lew
the Baker, Your Honour.  This routine report about the proceedings in the
tribunal of Chiang-pei just came in.  It contains a passage concerning that
gangster.'


Judge Dee quickly glanced the paper through.  With an angry exclaimation he gave
it to Tao Gan.


'Of all the bad luck!' he exclaimed.  'Here, read this, Tao Gan!  Yesterday
morning the Baker was killed in a drunken brawl!'


He walked on to his private office, angrily swinging his sleeves.


When he had sat down behind his desk he gave Tao Gan a somber look and said
dejectedly:


'I thought we were about to solve the smuggling case!  And now we are back where
we started.  The three men who could have told us for whom the contraband was
destined were murdered by the Baker.  Small wonder that Ma Joong and Chiao Tai
can't find them!  Their bones must be rotting in a dry well, or buried under a
tree in the forest!  And the Baker, the only man who could have told us who the
ring-leaders of the smuggling are, he had to get killed!'  He angrily tugged his
beard.


Tao Gan slowly wound the three long hairs that grew on his cheek round his thin
forefinger.  After a while he said:


'Perhaps a thorough interrogation of the Baker's associates in Chiang-pei
might...'


'No,' Judge Dee said curtly.  'The Baker killed off the men who did the dirty
work for him.  That he took that extreme measure proves that he was under orders
from his principal to keep everything connected with the smuggling strictly
secret.'  He took his fan from his sleeve and began to fan himself.  After a
while he resumed:  'Twan's murder must be closely connected with the smuggling
case.  I have the distinct feeling that if we succeed in solving theat crime, we
shall have the key to the riddle of the smuggling ring.  Come in!'


There had been a knock on the door.  Now a tall, rawboned woman, clad in a
simple brown robe and with a black piece of cloth wound round her head, entered
the office, pushing a slender young girl in front of her.


'This is Miss Seng, Your Honour,' the matron reported in a hoarse voice.


Judge Dee gave the girl a sharp look.  She stared back at him defiantly with her
large, expressive eyes.  Her oval, sun-tanned face was of a striking beauty.
She didn't wear any make-up and she did not need it either.  Her small petulant
mouth was as red as a cherry, the long eyebrows above her finely chiselled nose
had a natural graceful curve and the hair that hung in two tresses down to her
shoulders was long and glossy.  The shabby blue jacket and the patched blue
trousers seemed an incongruous attire for such a beauty.  She remained standing
in front of the desk, her hands stuck in the straw rope round her middle that
served as a belt.


After the judge had studied her for a while, he said evenly:


'We are trying to trace the whereabouts of Mr. Twan Mou-tsai.  Tell me where and
how you met him.'


'If you think you'll get anything out of me, Mister Official,' she snapped, 'you
are making the worst mistake of your life!'


The matron stepped forward to slap her face, but the judge raised his hand.  He
said calmly:


'You are standing before your magistrate, Miss Seng.  You have to answer my
questions, you know.'


'Think I am afraid of the whip?  You can beat me as much as you like, I can
stand it!'


'You won't be whipped,' Tao Gan spoke up by her side.  'Quite apart from the
matter of Uncle Twan, you are guilty of vagracy and prostitution without a
license.  You'll be branded on both your cheeks.'


She suddenly grew pale.


'Don't worry!' Tao Gan added affably.  'If you put on lots of powder, the marks
won't show.  Not too much, at least.'


The girl stood very still, staring at the judge with scared eyes.  Then she
shrugged and said:


'Well, I have done nothing wrong.  And I don't believe that Uncle Twan said bad
things about me.  Never!  Where I met him?  In the capital, about one year ago,
I had cut my leg and walked into Twan's store to buy myself a plaster.  He
happened to be standing at the counter, and struck up a conversation with me,
friendly like.  It was the first time that sucvh a rich fellow had shown
interest in me without at once beginning to talk about you know what, and I
liked him for that.  I agreed to meet him that night, and so one thing led to
another, if you know what I mean.  He is an old man, of course, well over fifty,
I'd say.  But a real gentleman, nicely spoken and always ready to listen to my
small talk.'


She fell silent, and looked expectantly at the judge.


'How long did the affair last?' he asked.


'A couple of weeks. Then I told Uncle Twan that we'd have to say goodbye,
because we would be going on to the next place.  He wants to give me a silver
piece but I say no, I am not a whore, thank Heaven, though my brother'd love
that, the lazy pimp!  So that was that.  But three weeks later, when we are tin
Kwang-yeh, Twan suddenly comes walking into our inn.  He tells me he wants me to
becvome his second wife, and that he'll give my brother a handsome present, in
cash.'


She wiped her face with her sleeve, pulled her jacket straight and went on:


'I tell Twan much obliged but I don't want no money, no nothing.  I just want my
freedom, and I am not dreaming of getting myself shut up within four walls, say
m'lady to his first wife, and be after the servants from morning to night.  Twan
goes off, the poor old fellow is very sad.  Me too - for then I have fight with
my brother and he beats me black and blue!  Well, the next month, when we are in
a village u-river, near our home Chiang-pei, old Twan again turns up.  He says
he has sold his drug business to his partner, for he has decided to join us.  My
brother says he's welcome provided he pays him a regular salary, for he's
nobody's nursemaid for nothing, he says.  I tell my brother nothing doing.  Twan
can come along, I say, and he can sleep with me if and when I feel like it.  But
I don't want one copper from him.  My brother flies into a real rage, he and
Chang catch me and pull my trousers down.  I'd have got a thorough caning, but
Twan came in between.  He took my brother aside, and they worked out some kind
of arrangement.  Well, if twan wants to pay my brother for teaching him the
tricks of the road, that's his business.  So Twan joined up with us and he has
been with us for nearly a year.  Until last night.'


'Do you mean to say,' Judge Dee asked, 'that Mr. Twan a wealthy merchant
accustomed to all the luxuries of the capital, shared your life and roamed about
as a common vagabond?'


'Of course he did!  He liked it, I tell you.  He told me a hundred times that he
had never been so happy before.  He said he had become fed up with life in the
capital.  His wives had been all right when they were young, but now they
interfering with his business and always wanted to teach him how he should run
the store.  He had been very fond of his only daughter, but she had married a
merchant down south and he didn't see her any more.  Also, he said, he had ao
attend parties every other night and that had given him a bad stomach.  But
after he joined us he never had any trouble with his stomach no more, he said.
Besides, Chang taught him how to fish, and Uncle Twan took a powerful liking to
that.  Became quite good at it, too.'


The judge observed her for a while, tugging at his moustache.  Then he asked:


'I suppose that Mr. Twan visited many business acquaintances in the places you
passed through?'


'Not him!  He said he was done with all that.  He only visited a colleague now
and then, to get money.'


'Did Mr. Twan carry large amount of cash on his person?'


'Wrong again!  About me he was silly all right, but apart from that Uncle Twan
was a mighty slick business man, believe me!  Newver carried more than a handful
of coppers on him.  But every time we came to a larger city, he would go to a
silver shop, and cash a draft, as he called it.  Then he gave the money he
received to a colleague of his, to keep for him.  A wise measure, my brother
being the kind of sneaky rat he is!  But Uncle Twan could always get his hands
on plenty of money should he need it.  And when I say plenty, I mean plenty!
When we came here to Han-yuan, he had five gold bars on him.  Five gold bars,
beg your pardon!  I never knew one man could have that much money all to
himself!  For Heaven's sake, don't let my brother see that, I told Twan; he's
not a killer, but for that much gold he would gladly murder the whole town!
Uncle Twan smiled that little smile, and said he knew a safe place for putting
it away.  And the next day he sure enough had only one string of coppers in his
pocket.  Can I have a cup of tea?'


Judge Dee gave a sign to the matron.  She poured the girl a cup, but her sour
face clearly indicated that she disapproved of this infringement of prison
rules.  The judge did not notice it, for he was looking at Tao Gan.  Tao Gan
nodded.  They were getting on the right track.  After the girl had taken a few
sips, Judge Dee asked:


'To whom did Mr. Twan give those gold bars?'


She shrugged her shapely shoulders.


'He told me a lot about himself, but never a word about business, and I never
asked him.  Why should I?  On our first day here, he told my brother he had to
see a man who had a shop in the market-place.  "I thought you had never been to
Han-yuan before?" my brother asks. "I haven't," Uncle Twan says. "But I have
friends!"'


'When did you see Mr. Twan last?'


'Yesterday night, just before dinner.  He went out and didn't come back.  Had
enough of it, I suppose, and went back home to the capital.  That's his right,
he is a free man, isn't he?  But he ought t ohave known there was no need trying
to fool me.  He even went out of his way last night to tell me that he was
planning to join our gang officially, so to speak, and take the oath!  Why not
tell me outright that we were through?  I'd have missed him a bit, but not too
much.  A young girl like me can do without an uncle, can't she?'


'Quite.  Where did he say he was going?'


'Oh, he said with that same secret smile of his that he was going to have a bite
in the house of the friend he had seen our first day here.  And I swallowed
that!'


Judge Dee put the emerald ring on the table.


'You stated that you never accepted anything from Mr. Twan.  Why then did you
try to pawn this ring of his?'


'I didn't!  I rather liked the thing, so Uncle Twan often let me play around
with it for a few days.  When we happened to pass a big pawnshop the other day,
I walked in to ask what it was worth, just for fun.  But that fat pawnbroker
tried to make up to me at once, grabbed my sleeve and whispered dirty
proposals.  So I walked out again.'  She pushed a stray lock away from her
forehead and went on with a half smile:  'It sure enough was my unlucky day!  As
soon as I come out, a tall bully grabs my arm and says I am his sweetheart!
Gave me the creeps the way he looked at me with his bulging eyes!  But Uncle
Twan says at once: "Hands off, she's my girl!", and my brother he twists his arm
and sends him on his way wit ha good kick to his behind.  All men are the same,
I tell you!  They think you have just to lift your little finger to a vagabond
girl, and hey presto she throws her arms round your neck!  No, Uncle Twan was a
white crow all right!  And if you tell me that he has accused me of something or
other, then I'll call you a liar to your face!'


Tao Gan noticed that Judge Dee did not seem to have heard her last words.
Staring straight ahead, he was caressing hes sidewhikers, his thoughts
apparently elsewhere.  It struck Tao Gan that the judge semed rather depressed,
and he wondered what had caused this sudden change, for before the interview
with Miss Seng he had been keen enough on obtaining more clues to the smuggling
case.  And the girl had unwittingly supplied them with valuable information.
The judge too must have deduced from her rambling account that Twan had joined
the gangsters only as a cover for his illegal activities; probably Twan had been
the paymaster of the smuggling ring.  An excellent cover, too, for who would
suspect a tramp roaming the country with a couple of outlaws?  And the man Twan
had gone to visit in the morning must be one of the agents who distributed the
contraband.  A house-tohouse search of all the shops in the market-place and a
close interrogation of the owners would doubtless bring to light who that agent
was.  And through him they could find out who the ringleader was ... the man the
central authorities were so eager to discover!  Tao Gan cleared his throat
several times, but Judge Dee did not seem to nitice it.  The matron also was
astonished at the prolonged silence.  She darted a questioning look at Tao Gan,
but the thin man could only shake his head.


The girl began to fidget.  'Stand still!' the matron snapped at her.  Judge Dee
looked up, startled from his musings.  He pushed his cap back and told Miss Seng
quietly:


'Mr. Twan was murdered last night.'


'Murdered you say?' the girl burst out.  'Uncle Twan murdered?  Who did it?'


'I thought you would be able to tell us,' the judge replied.


'Where was he found?' she asked tensely.


'In a deserted hut, in the forest.  Half way up the mountain slope.'


She hit her small fist on the desk and shouted with sparkling eyes:


'That bastard Lew did it!  The Baker sent his men after him, because Uncle Twan
had helped us to leave that rotten crowd of his!  And Uncle Twan fell into the
trap!  The bastard, the stinking bastard!'


She buried her face in her hands and burst out in sobs.


Judge Dee waited till she had calmed down a bit.  He pointed at her cup and when
she had drunk again he asked:


'Did Mr. Twan, when he joined you, also cut off the tip of his left little
finger?'


She smiled through her tears.


'He wanted to, but he didn't have the guts!  I don't know how many times he
tried, him standing with his left hand on a tree trunk and a chopper in his
right, and me standing beside him and counting one two three! But he always
funked it!'


The judge nodded.  He thought for a few moments, then he shook his head, heaved
a deep sigh and took his writing brush.  He jotted down a brief message on one
of his large red visiting-cards, put it in an envelope and wrote a few words on
the outside.  'Call a clerk!' he ordered Tao Gan.


When Tao Gan came back with the senior scribe, the judge gave him the envelope
and said: 'Let the headman deliver this at once.'  Then he turned to the girl
again, gave her a thoughtful look and asked: 'Haven't you got a regular young
man somewhere?'


'Yes.  He's a boatman in Chiang-pei.  He wants to marry me, but I told him to
wait a year or two.  Then he'll have a boat of his own, and I'll have had the
fun I want.  We'll travel up and down the canal carrying freight, making enough
to keep our ricebowl filled and having a good time into the bargin!'  She darted
an anxious look at the judge.  'Are you really going to have my face branded,
like the beanpole there said?'


'No, we won't.  But you'll have to do with less freedom, for some time to come.
Once can have too much even of that, you know!'


He gave a sign to the matron.  She took the girl's arm and led her away.


'How she rattled on!' Tao Gan exclaimed.  'It was hard to get her started, but
then she went on and on without stopping!'


'I let her tell everything in her own way.  A strict cross-examination is
indicated only when you notice that a person is telling lies.  Remember that for
a subsequent occasion, Tao Gan.'  He clapped his hands, and ordered the clerk
who answered his summons to bring a hot towel.


'Twan Mou-tsai was a clever scoundrel, sir,' Tao Gan resumed.  'That girl is no
fool, but she never understood that Twan was directing a smuggling ring.'


Judge Dee made no comment.  He rearranged the papers on his desk and placed the
emerald ring in the cleared space, right in front of him.  The clerk brought a
copper basin of hot scented water.  The judge picked a towel from it, and
thoroughly rubbed his face and hands.  Then he leaned back in his chair and
said:


'Open the window, Tao Gan.  It's getting stuffy here.'  He thought for a brief
while, then looked up at Tao Gan and resumed: 'I don't know whether Twan was
clever or not.  The picture Miss Seng gave was drawn from life: and elderly man
who suddenly begins to doubt the validity of all accepted standards, and wonders
what he has been living for, all those years.  Many men pass through this stage
after they have reached a certain age.  For a year or two they are a nuisance to
themselves and their housemates, then they usually come round again, and laugh
at their own folly..  With Twan,  however, it was different.  He decided to make
a clean break, and carried that decision to its logical conclusion, namely the
starting of an entirely new life. Whether he would have regretted that decision
after a few years must remain an open question.  He must have been an
interesting man, that  Mr. Twan.  Eccentric, but certainly of strong character.'


The judge fell silent.  Tao Gan began to shift impatiently in his chair.  He was
eager to discuss the next phase of the investigation.  He cleared his throat a
few times, then asked a bit diffidently:


'Shall we have Chang brought in for questioning now, sir?'


Judge Dee looked up.


'Chang?  Oh yes, that friend of Seng Kiu, you mean.  You can take care of that,
Tao Gan, tomorrow.  Just the routine questions.  He and Seng Kiu are no
problem.  I was wondering about the girl, really.  I don't know what to do about
her!  The government takes a grave view of vagrancy because it may lead to
robbery and other disturbances of the peace.  And also of unlicensed
prostitution, because that is a form of tax evasion and therefore affects the
Treasury. According to the law, she should be flogged and put in prison for two
years.  But I am convinced that that would turn her into a hardened criminal,
who would end up either on the scaffold or in the gutter.  That would be a pity,
for she cettainly has some sterling qualities.  We must try to find a another
solution.'


He worriedly shook his head, and resumed:


'As to Seng Kiu and that other rascal, I'll sentence them to one year's
compulsory service with the labour corps of our Northern Army.  That'll cure
them of their lazy habits.  If If they do well, they can in due course request
to be enlisted as free soldiers.  As regards Seng's sister...Yes, that's the
solution, of course!  I'll assign her as a bondmaid to Mr. Han Yung-han!  Han is
a very strict, old-fashioned gentleman who keeps his large household in
excellent order.  If she works there for a year, she'll come to know all the
advantages of a more regular life, and in due time make that young boatman of
hers a good housewife.'


Tao Gan gave the judge a worried look.  He thought he really seemed very tired,
his face was pale and the lines beside his mouth had become more marked.  It had
indeed been a long day.  Would the judge consider it presumptuous if he propsed
to take charge of the routine check of the shops in the market-place?  Or let
him question Leng again?  He decided first to ascertain what Judge Dee's own
plans were.


'What do you think should be our next step, sir?  I thought...'


'Our next step?' the judge asked raising his tufted eye-brows.  'There is no
next step.  Didn't you see that ll our problems are solved?  Now we know how and
why Twan was murdered, who took his dead body to the hut, everything!
Including, of course, who was acting as local agent for the smuggling ring.'  As
Tao Gan stared at him, dumbfounded, the judge went on impatiently: 'Heavens, you
have heard all the evidence, haven't you?  If I am now winding up with you the
side-issues it's only because I have nothing better to do while I am waiting for
the central figure of this tragedy to make his appearance.'


Tao Gan opened his mouth to speak but Judge Dee went on quickly:


'Yes, it is indeed a tragedy.  Often, Tao Gan, the final solution of a
complicated case gives me a feeling of satisfaction, the satisfaction of having
righted a wrong, and solved a riddle.  This, however, is a case that depresses
me.  Strange, I had a vague foreboding of it when I had this ring here in my
hand early this morning, just after I had got it from the gibbon.  This ring
emanate an atmosphere of human suffering... Suffering is a terrible thing, Tao
Gan.  Sometimes it dignifies, mostly it degrades.  Presently we shall see how it
affected the main actor in this drama, and...'


He broke off his sentence and glanced at the door.  Footsteps had sounded in the
corridor outside.  The headman ushered in Mr. Wang.


The pharmacist, small and dapper in his glossy robe of black silk, made a low
bow.


'What can this person do for Your Honour?' he asked politely.


Judge Dee pointed at the emerald ring before him and said evenly:


'You may tell me why you didn't take this ring too when you removed the dead
man's possessions.'


Wang gave a violent start when he saw the ring.  But he quickly mastered himself
and said indignantly:


'I don't understand this at all, Your Honour!  The headman brought me your
visiting-card with the request to come here to give some information, and...'


'Yes,' the judge interrupted him.  'Information about the murder of your
colleague Twan Mou-tsai!'  The pharmacistwanted to speak but Judge Dee raised
his hand.  'No, listen to me!  I know exactly what happened.  You badly needed
the five gold bars Mr. Twan had entrusted to you, for your plan to smuggle two
boxes of valuable contraband from Chiang-pei into Han-yaun had miscarried.  The
Baker's men whom you had hired bungled it, and the military police seized the
costly merchandise you probably hadn't even paid for.  Twan's desire to join
Miss Seng's gang by taking the formal oath and cutting off the tip of his left
little finger gave you an excellent opportunity for murdering that unfortunate
man.'


The headman moved up close to Wang, but Judge Dee shook his head at him.  He
continued:


'Twan lacked the courage to cut off the fingertip himself, and you had promised
to perform the operation for him last night, in your own house up on the ridge.
You had agreed that it would be done with the large chopper used for cutting
medicinal roots into thin slices.  One end of the heavy, razor-edged knife is
attached with a hinge to the cutting board, the handle is on the other end.  By
means of this precision instrument, which every pharmacist and drug dealer has
at hand, the operation could be performed without the risk of cutting off too
much or too little, and so quickly and smoothly that the pain would be reduced
to a minumum.  Twan went to all this trouble because he wanted to prove to the
vagabond girl he loved that he intended to stay with her forever.'


The judge paused.  Wang stared at him with wide, unbelieving eyes.


'Before Twan had even placed his hand in the right position on the cutting
board, the large chopper came down and cut off four of his finters.  Then the
unfortunate old man was finished off by bashing in his skull with the iron
pestle of a drug mortar.  Afterwards his dead body was carried from your house
downhill to the deserted hut.  There it would have been discovered, probably
after many weeks, in an advanced state of decay.  Moreover, you had taken the
precaution of searching the body and removing everything that could have given a
clue to the dead man's identity.  I would have had the corpse burned as that of
an unidentified tramp.  But a gibbon of the forest put me on the right track.'


'A...a gibbon?' Wang stammered.


'Yes, the gibbon who found Twan's emerald ring, which I have here before me.
But that is no concern of yours.'


Judge Dee fell silent.  It was completely quiet in the small office.


Wang's face had turned ashen and his lips were twitching.  He swallowed a few
times before he spoke, in a voice so hoarse that it was hardly audible:


'Yes, I confess that I murdered Twan Mou-tsai.  Everything happened exactly as
you said.  With the exception of your remark about the two boxes of contraband.
Those were not my property, I was acting only as an agent.  I was to have
redistributed their contents.'  He sighed and continued in a detached voice: 'I
have had a number of financial reverses, these last two years, and my creditors
were pressing me.  The man whom I was most indebted to was a banker, in the
capital.'  He mentioned a name which Judge Dee recognized; the man was a well
known financier, a cousin of the Director of the Treasury.  'He wrote me a
letter saying that, if I would come to se him, he was willing to talk matters
over.  I travelled to the capital and he received me most kindly.  He said that,
if I agreed to collaborate with him on a certain financial scheme of his, he
would not only cancel my bonds, but also give me a generous share in the
proceeds.  Of course I agreed.  Then, to my horrified amazement, he went on to
explain coolly that he had organized a nation-wide smuggling ring!'


Wang passed his hand over his eyes.  Shaking his head, he resumed:


'When he mentioned the enormous profits, I weakened.  Finally I gave in.  I... I
can't afford to become a poor man.  And when I thought of all that money I would
receive... I should have known better!  Instead of cancelling my bonds, the
cruel devil held on to them, and his idea of rewarding me for my services was to
lend me money at an atrocious interest.  Soon I was completely in his
clutches.  When Twan entrusted the five gold bars to me, I thought at once that
this was my chance to pay my principal, and become a free man again.  I knew
that Twan had told nobody that he would come to my house last night, for he
didn't want others to know that he lacked the courage to perform the operation
himself.  He had insisted that I wouldn't even tell my family of his impending
visit.  I myself let him in, by the back door.'


The pharmacist took a silk handkerchief from his sleeve and wiped his moist
face.  Then he said firmly:


'If Your Honour will kindly let me have a sheet of paper, I shall now write out
my formal confession that I willfully murdered Twan Mou-tsai.'


'I haven't asked you for a formal confession yet, Mr. Wang,' Judge Dee said
calmly.  'There are a few points that have to be clarified.  In the first place:
why did Mr. Twan want to have such large sums of money always at his disposal?'


'Because he kept hoping that some day that vagabond girl would consent t omarry
him.  He told me that he wanted to be able to pay off her brother at once, and
buy a nice country seat somewhere, to start a new life.'


'I see.  Second: why didn't you tell Twan frankly that you needed his gold
because you were in serious financial trouble?  Isn't it the old-established
custom that members of the same guild always assist each other?  Adn Mr. Twan
was a very wealthy man who could well afford to lend you five gold bars.'


Wang seemed greatly upset by these questions.  His lips moved, but he could not
bring out a word.  Judge Dee did not pursue the matter further and went on:


'Third, you are a slightly-built elderly man.  How did you manage to carry the
corpse all the way to the hut?  It's true that it is downhill, but even so I
don't think you could have done it.'


Wang had taken hold of himself.  Shaking his head disconsolately he answered:


'I can't understand myself how I did it, sir!  But I was frantic, obsessed by
the idea that I had to hide the body, at once.  That gave me the force to drag
the corpse to the garden, and from there to the forest.  When I came back to the
house, I was more dead than alive...'  Again he mopped his face.  Then he added
in a firmer voice: 'I fully realize that I have murdered a good man because of
his money, sir, and that I shall have to pay for that crime with my life.'


Judge Dee sat up straight.  Placing his elbows on the desk he leaned forward and
told Wang in a gentle voice:


'You didn't realize, however, that if you formally confess to this murder, all
your possessions will be confiscated, Mr. Wang. Besides, your son wouldn't
inherit in any case, for I shall have to have him certified as of unsound mind.'


'What do you mean?'  Wang shouted.  He bent forward and crashed his fist on the
desk.  'It isn't true, it's a lie! My son is very sound of mind, I tell you!
The boy's mental development is only a bit retarded, and he's only twenty, after
all!  When he grows older, his mind will doubtless improve... With a little
patience, and if one avoids getting him excited, he is perfectly normal.'


He gave the judge an imploring look and went on with a shaking voice:


'He is my only son, sir, and such a nice, obdient boy! I assure you, sir...'


Judge Dee spoke quietly:


'I shall personally see to it that he is given every possible care, Mr. Wang,
during your term in prison.  I give you my word for that.  But if we don't take
adequate measures, your son will cause more accidents.  He must be placed in
ward, that's the only solution.  Two days ago, when he came out of your shop, he
happened to see that vagabond girl who was just leaving Leng's pawnshop.  She is
very beautiful, and in his confused mind your son thought she was his
sweetheart.  He wanted to take hold of her, but Mr. Twan told him she was _his_
sweetheart, and then Miss Seng's brother chased your away.  This occurrence made
a deep impression on his poor, deranged mind.  Yesterday, when Twan came to
visit you, your son must have seen him.  Convinced that this was the man who had
stolen his sweetheart from him, he killed him.  Then you let your son carry the
corpse to the hut, you leading the way.  For your son that was an easy job, for
like many young men of unsound mind, he is exceptionally strong and tall.'


Wang nodded dazedly.  Deep lines marked his pale, drawn face, his shoulders were
sagging.  He had suddenly changed from a dapper, efficient merchant into a tired
old man.


'So that is why he kept talking about the girl and Twan... I was taken
completely unawares last night, for the boy had been in such a good mood, the
whole day... In the afternoon I had taken him for a walk in the woods, and he
was so happy, watching the gibbons in the trees... He dined with the
housemaster, then he went to bed, for he tires easily... I had told the
housemaster that I would dine alone, in my library, had him put a cold snack
there read yfor me.  When I was eating there with Twan, I told him about the
gold.  He said at once that I needn't worry about that, he could easily order
more from the capital should he need it, and I could pay him back in
instalments.  '"The kind help you shall extend to me presently," he added with a
smile, "I shall consider as the interest on the loan!" Twan was like that, sir.
A truly remarkable man.  He quickly emptied a large beaker of wine, then we went
to the small workshop I have in my garaden shed, to experiment with new drugs.
Twan put his left hand on the cutting board, and closed his eyes.  Just when I
was adjusting the chopper, someone gave a push against my elbow. '"The bad old
man has stolen my girl!" my son cried out behind me.  The chopper had clapped
down and cut off four fingers of Twan's hand.  He fell forward over the table,
wit ha frightened cry.  I quickly looked round for a jar of powder, to staunch
the bleeding.  Suddenly my son grabbed an iron pestle from the table and hit him
a terrible blow on the back of his head...'


He gave the judge  a forlorn look.  Then, grabbing the edge of the desk with
both hands, he said:


'The bright moon shining into his bedroom had wakened the boy, and looking out
of his window he had seen Twan and me going to the garden shed.  The moonlight
always brings him int oa kind of trance... My boy didn't know what he did, Your
Honour!  He is so gentle as a rule, he...'  His voice trailed off.


'Your son shan't be prosecuted, of course, Mr. Wang.  Mentally deficient persons
are outside the pale of the law.  Mr. Tao here will now take you to his own
office next door, and ther eyou will draw up a document describing to the best
of your knowledge the organization and activities of the smuggling ring, adding
the names and addresses of all other agents known to you.  Is Mr. Leng, the
pawnbroker, among them, by thy way?'


'Oh no, sir!  Why should you suspect him?  He is my neighbour, and I never...'


'I was told that he regularly visits Chiang-pei, one of the important bases of
your smuggling organization.'


'Mr. Leng's wife is extremely jealous,' Wang remarked dryly, 'She doesn't allow
him to have other women in the house.  Therefore he established a separate
houseshold in Chiang-pei.'


'Quite.  Well, after you have signed and sealed the document I mentioned,
Mr. Wang, you will then write a complete account of Mr. Twan's fatal accident.
This very night I shall send both documents by special messanger to the
capital.  I shall add a recommendation for clemency, pointing out that you
voluntarily furnished the information that will enable the authorities to break
up the smuggling ring.  I hope this will result in your prison term being
substantially reduced.  However that may be, I shall try to arrange that your
son is allowed to visit you  from time to time in prison.  Take Mr. Wang to your
room, Tan Gan.  Supply him with writing material, and give strict orders that he
is not to be disturbed.'


When Tao Gan came back, he found Judge Dee standing in front of the open window,
his hands behind his back.  He was enjoying the cool air that came inside from
the small walled-in garden, planted with banana trees.  Pointing at the mass the
luxuriant green leaves he said:


'Look at those magnificent bunches of bananas, Tao Gan!  They have just
ripened.  Tell the headman to bring a few to my private residence, so that I can
give the gibbons some, tomorrow morning.'


Tao Gan nodded, his long face creased in a broad smile.


'Allow me to comgratulate you, sir, on...'


Judge Dee raised his hand.


'It was thanks to your prompt and efficient action that we could solve this
complicated case so quickly, Tao Gan.  I apologize for being rather curt with
you, just before Mr. Wang came in.  The fact is that I was dreading that
interview, for I hate nothing more than to see a man go all to pieces in front
of me - even if he is a criminal.  But Mr. Wang bore himself well.  His great
love for his son lent him dignity, Tao Gan.'


The judge resumed his seat behind the desk.


'I shall write a letter to Sergeant Hoong in Chiang-pei at once, informing him
that the smuggling case has been solved, and that he and my other two
lieutenants must come back here tomorrow.  And you can issue the necessary
orders for the release from prison of our friend the pawnbroker.  Those hours in
jail will have given him an opportunity for reflection, I hope.'


He took up his wrinting brush, but suddenly he checked himself and resumed:


'Now that I have worked together closely with you alone on a case, Tao Gan, I
want to tell you that I shall be very glad to have you on my permanent staff.  I
have but one piece of advice to give to you for your further career as a
criminal investigator.  That is that you must never allow yourself to become
emotionally involved in the cases you are dealing with.  This is most important,
Tao Gan, but most difficult to achieve.  I ought to know.  I have never learned
it.'